TMW Coding Standards and Best Programming Practices for PHP
===========================================================

## Contents
1. [Naming Conventions and Standards](#naming-conventions-and-standards)
	1. [Code Indentation](#code-indentation)
	2. [Trailing Whitespace](#trailing-whitespace)
	3. [Naming Conventions](#naming-conventions)
	4. [Code Commenting](#code-commenting)
	5. [String Concatenation](#string-concatenation)
	6. [Database Schemas](#database-schemas)
2. [Good Programming Practices](#good-programming-practices)
	1. [KISS Principles](#kiss-principles)
	2. [Be Mindful of the Language](#be-mindful-of-the-language)
	3. [Clear Commenting](#clear-commenting)
	4. [Encoding Issues & Database](#encoding-issues--database)
	5. [Frameworks and Platforms](#frameworks-and-platforms)
3. [Security](#security)
	1. [Treat All Incoming Data as Tainted](#treat-all-incoming-data-as-tainted)
		1. [SQL Injection](#sql-injection)
	2. [Handling File Uploads](#handling-file-uploads)
	3. [Databases](#databases)
4. [Server Environment Settings](#server-environment-settings)
	1. [Handling Redirects](#handling-redirects)
	2. [PHP Parsing](#php-parsing)

Naming Conventions and Standards
--------------------------------

### Code Indentation

Generally you should use the Allman style
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indent\_style\#Allman\_style) of indenting
code. This puts opening braces onto a new line of their own, such that
they line up vertically:

    if(expression)
    {
        // statements
    }

This will differ slightly from the indentation style mainly used for
Javascript (like K&R), but there are valid cases where the Allman style
would cause syntactic differences in code execution (such as implied
return values in Javascript because the semicolon is optional). The
advantage to the Allman style (aside from visually outlining logical
blocks of code) is that the expression part can be commented out leaving
the statements part intact and others easily added during testing and
development:

    //for($i=0; $i<count($array); $i++)
    foreach($array as $key => $value)
    {
        // statements
    }

Also, tabs should be used to indent code rather than spaces. The reason
for this is to preserve the formatting of code when multiple people are
working on it, as a tab is an unspecified indentation amount (e.g. 2, 4,
or 8 spaces), which people can set to their own preference on their
machines without affecting the way it's presented for you. This avoids
issues with code not formatting correctly for different developers
working on the same project.

### Trailing Whitespace

Avoid this if you can. Most IDEs and advanced text editors have an
option to automatically strip trailing whitespace upon saving of a file,
and you should enable this option if it exists.

### Naming Conventions

Classes, constants and variables should follow the Python/Ruby naming
conventions
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naming\_convention\_%28programming%29\#Python\_and\_Ruby)
where class names use camel case, constants are all caps with
underscores used to space, and other variables and method/function names
are lower-case with underscores used to space. All variables, constants
and functions should use logical names without unnecessary abbreviations
but not be overly verbose. So, the following are good:

    $error_message
    DB_USERNAME
    get_all_news_content()

But the following are not:

    $a
    LONG_CONSTANT_DESCRIBING_THE_NATURE_OF_THE_VALUE_IT_CONTAINS_WHERE_A_COMMENT_WOULD_DO
    do_something()

There are a few occasions where single-letter variables can be used,
such as counters in small loops, or when dealing with coordinate systems
or colour models, for example, but in the main variable names should
always reflect the data they contain. If you feel there might be any
ambiguity when initially declaring them, add a comment to indicate this.
It can also be helpful to make variable names for things like arrays
plural and simple objects singular, such as:

    $images = array(1, 2, 3, 4);
    foreach($images as $image)
    {}

### Code Commenting
It's best practice if code is sufficiently commented to aid future
developers who may have to pick it up. At the very least, all functions
and class methods should be commented in the
[<http://phpdoc.org/docs/latest/glossary.html#term-docblocks>, DocBlock]
format, and should contain a brief description about that function, and
details on the inputs and outputs. A decent IDE should be able to
automatically supply a lot of these details for you when you open the
DocBlock with `/**` and hit enter.

Below is an example:

    /**
    * return a filtered string
    * @param string $filter_line the string to be filtered
    * @param string $replace_char optional character to use as the replacement - defaults to *
    * @return string
    */
    public function filter_string($filter_line, $replace_char='*')
    {
        ...

### String Concatenation

It's typical in JavaScript to build up strings with lots of
concatenation like this:

    var greeting = 'hello ' + name[0] + ' ' + name[1] + ', welcome.';

This is bad practice in PHP; it makes the code look messy. Instead,
something like one of these is preferred:

    $greeting = "hello {$name[0]} {$name[1]}, welcome.";

    $greeting =<<<GREETING
        hello {$name[0]} {$name[1]}, welcome.
    GREETING;

The second example is better for large text blocks that might themselves
contain quotes where escaping them becomes too messy.

### Database Schemas

While not strictly PHP, it's important that you can develop a well
structured and flexible schema. This includes the following:

-   Using the right database encodings. Generally using utf8 for your
    character set, and `utf8_general_ci` for your collation will be
    enough, as this should cover the most typical types of character
    encodings (including Cyrillic)
-   Selecting the right table engine. Typically, most MySQL tools
    default to MyISAM or InnoDB, but it's useful to know the differences
    between the two. MyISAM is faster for reads, slower for writes, and
    employs table-level locking on writes, which is a potential
    bottleneck. InnoDB is faster for writes, slower than MyISAM for
    reads, but employs row-level locking and allows you to use foreign
    key constraints.
-   Use the most appropriate field types. If you need a column for
    simple yes/no values, don't use `varchar`, use something like `enum`
    instead, as this is stored internally as an integer rather than a
    string, which allows for better indexing, faster queries, and a
    reduced memory and storage footprint. Integer fields should be set
    to an appropriate length type, it makes little sense storing a list
    of captcha question IDs in a `bigint` field, and likewise, no sense
    storing a list of Twitter comment IDs as `tinyint`
-   Generate appropriate indexes on tables. Don't just index everything,
    but focus on the fields that you are going to be using in joins and
    searches. This can have a tremendous impact on your application when
    done correctly
-   Don't be too worried about multiple joins across tables to retrieve
    a dataset. With good indexes this won't be an issue, and embracing a
    good relational schema allows your data to be used in more flexible
    ways in the future as the nature of an application changes. It's
    also a *lot* faster than iterating over multiple content sets in PHP
    and attempting to perform the same actions there.
-   Wherever possible, join on integers (this includes dates and `enum`s
    which are stored as integers internally) as this is a lot faster
    than joining on strings, and indexes are often smaller.

Good Programming Practices
--------------------------

### KISS Principles

As with any language, avoid functions/methods in PHP that are overly
long. Typically, anything that can not fit comfortably into a standard
screen of code (this is deliberately subjective, as it may vary from
project to project) is too long, and should be refactored. Follow the
Unix philosophy and write small methods that do one job well. If you
have a method or function which performs several tasks then consider
splitting these out.

Avoid over engineering a solution to a problem. A simple holding page
does not necessarily need a large framework and database behind it. Be
aware that a sledgehammer is not always the ideal tool to crack a nut.

Also, omit the closing `?>` tag on scripts if there is no output to
follow within the same file, the PHP parser will automatically close it
if it's left out. This negates the chance of running into a “headers
already sent” error, which can be cause by trailing whitespace (a space,
newline, etc) after the closing PHP tag.

### Be Mindful of the Language

PHP is a loose-typed language, and as such can often behave in what
looks like an unexpected way if you're used to stricter languages. One
main thing to bear in mind is comparison operators. For example:

    $string = "Test string";
    if(strpos($string, "T"))
    {
        // do something
    }

This example will never execute the statements inside the braces because
the first character position match (0, as strings are treated somewhat
similarly to C++ strings in PHP) equates to a false value due to the
loose typing. Instead, this should be used:

    $string = "Test string";
    if(strpos($string, "T") !== false)  // test explicitly for non-false values
    {
        // do something
    }

PHP is also quite forgiving of some things, so code might still work if
you try to treat a string as an array of characters, but it might
exhibit strange behaviour in certain circumstances, just as code will
function if you try treating a variable of one type as another, but it
may not work as expected under all conditions, even though PHP is a
loosely typed language. The following illustrates this:

    $string = "tested";
    $chess = "♔♕♖♗♘♙";

    $string[0] = 'b';
    $chess[0] = 'a';

    var_dump($string);
    var_dump($chess);

    //output:
    string(6) "bested"
    string(18) "a��♕♖♗♘♙"

While the string replacement works for the `$string` variable, it breaks
for `$chess` because the array syntax only works for plain ASCII
strings, not any of the multibyte encodings.

### Clear Commenting

If possible, all class methods and functions you write should be
documented with PHPDoc syntax. This gives a consistent commenting style
that can be used to generate documentation if needed. Try to be verbose
in the comments if something is not immediately obvious, and explain all
inputs and outputs. So, this would be an example of good commenting:

    /**
    * returns an array containg the data count for the 'other' portion and the 
    * index of the key at which the other count was started
    * the cutoff is hard-coded at 2%, i.e. if the value is less than 2% of the
    * total, it gets shoved into the $other total
    * @param array $data the original data
    * @param array $labels the datasets keys
    * @return bool 
    */
    function _aportion_other(&$data, &$labels)
    {}

But this, not so much:

    /**
    * modifies the data and label arrays
    * @param array $data
    * @param array $labels
    */
    function _aportion_other(&$data, &$labels)
    {}

### Encoding Issues & Database

To avoid unnecessary encoding issues ensure that all PHP scripts are
saved as UTF8 files. Most editors and IDEs will do this automatically,
although some on Windows platforms might need some 'encouragement' in
this regard. Likewise, if you're using a MySQL database, ensure that the
correct encoding is set there. MySQL has three levels of encoding:
database, table, and field. Typically, setting it to utf8\_general\_ci
when you create the database will ensure that it cascades down
automatically when you create tables and fields. If you set it wrongly
though, and attempt to retroactively correct it, you will need to do so
at each level, as such changes only propagate downwards upon creation,
not modification. You may also run into issues with the connection that
PHP has with MySQL, which must also be made as UTF8. The exact
implementation varies slightly for the different connection methods, PDO
uses this for example:

    $pdo = new PDO("mysql:dbname=$dbname;host=$dbhost",$dbuser,$dbpass, array(PDO::MYSQL_ATTR_INIT_COMMAND => "SET NAMES 'UTF8'"));

Also, when creating tables, try to use the field types that are most
appropriate for the data they will be carrying, so things like telephone
numbers, email addresses, names, etc, will suit the varchar type, small
finite lists suit an enum type, etc. It can be worth being overly
generous when specifying lengths for varchar fields also; entries won't
use more space than they need to, but it will prevent accidental
truncation of data. As mentioned above, take care when inserting data
into the database, and ensure that all data is properly filtered to
prevent SQL injection. The best method is to use parameterised PDO
queries, but if you're using a framework or platform it may have an 
abstracted interface for something like this. '''Avoid using the 
'''``mysql_*`` `**`functions` `at` `all` `costs!`**

If you run into issues with the “headers already sent” error, and you're
sure there is no output occurring before you're attempting a (either
explicitly or implied) `header()` call, then check to see if you're
editor/IDE has added a byte order mark (BOM). PHP doesn't play well with
these, and it can trigger some unusual bugs, so BOMs should be removed
whenever possible in source code.

### Frameworks and Platforms

If you're using a framework or other platform you should follow the best
practices of that to ensure code consistency. If it's an MVC framework,
make sure your code is split accordingly, e.g. file and database access
should be done only from within a model, not a controller, and view code
shouldn't be in a controller either. If the framework/platform offers
something like Eloquent or Active Record, then you should try to use
that rather than roll your own database library. There may be some valid
exceptions to this, such as queries that would be too complex to create
in Active Record, or validation libraries that are sub-standard (e.g.
CodeIgniters validation library), and it may just be more efficient to
write your own methods.

As a general rule though, you should try to adhere to the guidelines
given by the framework of choice.

Our preferred MVC frameworks are:

-   Laravel
-   Zend
-   CodeIgniter (this should be used only on older PHP hosting that
    cannot support newer frameworks and PHP functionality)

Some of the CMS platforms we use are:

-   WordPress
-   Expression Engine (*suggest this as a solution only if your life is
    threatened or you really don't care about your fellow developers*)
-   EZPublish

Security
--------

### Treat All Incoming Data as Tainted

It's always important to remember that any data coming from the user has
the potential to be malicious, so you should always treat all user data
as if it were anyway. This includes the following:

-   All form data – take advantage of the `filter_var()` function added
    in 5.2 before considering rolling your own. Also bear in mind that
    some frameworks (like CodeIgniter) don't use these functions, so
    there is potential for risk in their own implementations of
    validation functions. In particular, the email address validation is
    poor in CodeIgniter and does not validate correctly as per the ISO
    specification.

<!-- -->

-   Select list values, checkboxe & radio button values, and hidden
    fields - just because you're setting these from code, does not mean
    that they will contain your predefined values when the form is
    submitted. Always check these values on the server.
-   URL query string parameters – as above, make sure these are
    filtered. So for example, tacking this onto a stock Joomla site URL
    would reveal an injection vulnerability with an unsanitised URL
    being output directly to the page:\
    `test245ac2"><img src=a onerror=alert(1)>401493325e`. This kind of
    attack exists anywhere that the current URL is being output in the
    HTML, such as where it's used in the `<head>` section for SEO URLs.

<!-- -->

-   The URLs themselves can be altered in such a way as to inject code
    onto a page, which is particularly an issue with some frameworks and
    CMSs such as Joomla. Utilise functions such as `htmlspecialchars`,
    or `htmlentities`. **Note that you should only use these for
    presenting information in a browser, they are not to be applied to
    all data before inserting it into a database, for example.**

<!-- -->

-   Uploaded images – it's not always enough to check a files extension
    as this can be faked. A good method is using something like GD or
    Imagick (PHPs ImageMagick extension) to read in some data about the
    image. If it's not an image, try using the PECL FileInfo extension
    to get the mime type of the file which reads in the header bytes of
    a file to determine its type. Typically, resizing or resampling the
    image to the same dimensions that it should be will be sufficient.
    At a pinch, analysing the first few bytes of a file can help
    determine the validity of a file. See [Handling File Uploads](#handling-file-uploads)
    below for more details.

<!-- -->

-   Cookie values can be tampered with, do not store anything important
    in them which you don't mind being altered, and do not rely on any
    value retrieved from a cookie.

<!-- -->

-   Avoid incremental identifiers for sensitive information - rather
    than using an auto-incremented ID to retrieve information over the
    URL, consider using a GUID instead. Incremental IDs are an
    invitation for people to tamper, and could allow people to see
    information which is not intended for them.

<!-- -->

-   Header values in a request can be altered, so do not rely on these
    to be untampered.

#### SQL Injection

You should always use a method of connecting to a database that offers
some form of protection against SQL injection, whether it be through
parameterised queries, or prepared statements. You should never use the
deprecated `mysql_*` functions, as these are old and not secure.

Note that while it's good to validate and filter incoming data, be
mindful of the use to which that data is being put, so don't apply
`htmlentities()` to data that's only being put into a database, apply
that only once you're actually outputting it, as this may cause issues
with how you wish to use that data later on (see
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=htmlentities+before+db> for more
details on why this should be avoided).

If the framework you're using has a built-in database layer (like
ActiveRecord, or Eloquent) then use that, as that will (used correctly)
naturally protect against SQL injection. Be mindful here that each of
the frameworks' database layers behaves differently in terms of what it
escapes before sending to the database, and it's still possible to abuse
the DB layer object to create an SQL injection point.

### Handling File Uploads

File uploads can often be used as an attack vector just as easily as bad
form and URL data, more so in some situations. As such, validating and
sanitising your file uploads is extremely important. There is a great
PECL extension for this called `finfo`, which detects the mime type of a
file based on its contents rather than the extensions (as the extension
comes from the user and must be treated as tainted). This may not always
be available on all servers though. If that's the case, then you have to
go a bit “old-school”. For example, if you're expecting an image upload,
check to see that it is indeed a valid image by using GD to detect its
dimensions. Likewise, if it's a PDF, us a library like fPDF to identify
it. `DomDocument` can handle the XML/HTML/SVG files, and in conjunction
with Zip can handle modern office documents.

It's also best practice to store user generated content outside of the
web document root if possible so that it is not accessible directly from
a web browser. For example, if your website is in a `httpdocs`
directory, consider creating a sibling directory next to it to store
user content and then using PHP to pass through the file data.

### Databases

If you're using a framework or CMS, use the database methods and
connections that it provides. Do not try rolling your own, as this can
lead to opening yourself up to security vulnerabilities. Most good
frameworks will provide methods for making data safe for use in queries,
and some of the better ones use things like PDO which allows you to
parameterise your queries. Always use these where they exist, even it
slightly increases your development time.

In no case should you ever store unencrypted passwords. At the very
least use `md5()` to generate a hash of the password before storing it.
Ideally this would be salted with another piece of user data (to lessen
the chance of it being brute forced from an md5-hash list). If the
nature of your application requires it, then use more powerful
encryption methods in PHP to secure the passwords, like the `crypt()`
function, using a suitably strong algorithm.

Also, don't blindly apply all levels of sanitisation to your data as
soon as you receive it. Only use functions like `strip_tags` and
`htmlentities` when presenting data to a browser, it's not necessary
before inserting into a database. With the exception of passwords, you
should try to store user data in the database as close to the original
as possible.

Local Development Environment
-----------------------------

Your local development environment should always have all errors and
warnings displayed. The best way to do this is from within the php.ini
file, with the following configuration:

    display_errors = On
    error_reporting = E_ALL

It will also help to install the Xdebug PECL extension, as this will
give better debugging and error output. The package you'll need to
install for this is `php-pecl-xdebug`. Where possible your local
environment should mirror the live servers in terms of PHP version,
enabled libraries/modules and general config settings. Particularly
settings such as `upload_max_filesize`, and `post_max_size`. When you
produce release notes you should highlight these settings so that they
are correctly set on the server.

**<span style="color:red;">Do not turn off error display on your local
machine to hide warnings and other errors and use of @ to suppress
runtime errors is to be avoided always.</span>**

You should ensure that your code does not produce any errors or
warnings. Warnings might oft-times appear to be harmless, but they can
often indicate a larger logic bomb hidden within the code, and these
result in unexpected behaviour. Most typical warnings are usually around
issues of undeclared variable use, or using functions on the wrong types
of scaler (even though PHP is a loosely typed language, the type
conversion is subject to certain rules, and not all types can be
converted on the fly)

Server Environment Settings
---------------------------

If possible, always avoid setting site-wide server settings from within
PHP itself. Ideally, they should be set from the php.ini (if you have
access and it's not a setting which would have a detrimental effect on
other sites sharing the setting), the virtual host configuration file
(if you have access), or an .htaccess file (if the web server is
Apache). There are two main reasons for never setting these values from
within PHP itself:

-   Problems become more difficult to diagnose as these values do not
    present themselves from a `phpinfo()` call
-   Specific functions can be disabled from being set by PHP for
    security reasons at a server level

Sometimes setting these may be unavoidable, but when this happens, make
sure it's documented in any release notes and in the wiki to ensure any
future work isn't hindered by this. It's also preferable to keep all
configuration settings to a minimum set of files. Some frameworks split
configuration into specific files for general config, database
connections, mail, etc. In cases like this, document the files that may
need to be edited for a server deployment in the wiki page for the
project.

### Handling Redirects

Throughout the lifecycle of an application, it may be necessary to
employ permanent (301) redirects for the purposes of SEO and domain
addition and re-pointing.

These ideally would be handled from either an `.htaccess` file, or
through the Apache (or other web server) virtual host configuration
file. The main reason for this is to avoid hitting the PHP parser which
incurs an extra load on the server to process, which can have an effect
on the site as a whole for all visitors. Loading in any kind of
framework or CMS to perform the redirect is definitely overkill and not
recommended at all, as this then incurs extra memory requirements and an
impact on speed (dictated by the general speed of the framework/CMS in
question as opposed to a raw Apache request)

There may be valid time for exceptions, e.g. where the redirects become
too complicated to manage via a standard redirect list in a file (such
as for the Infiniti website which uses an XML mapping for the many
hundreds of redirects across all of its domains). These should be looked
at an weighed up on a case-by-case basis.

### PHP Parsing

It's never recommended to have the PHP parser invoked for non-PHP files,
as this will incur the overhead of running the parser when plain Apache
output would do. The exception to this is when you might be running
files through the parser as part of a security process, e.g.
authenticating user credentials before passing a files contents
downstream.